docs(recipes): EAV (#3300)
cube-js/cube.js: docs/content/Examples-Tutorials-Recipes/Entity-Attribute-Value.md

---
title: Entity-Attribute-Value Model
permalink: /recipes/entity-attribute-value
category: Examples & Tutorials
subCategory: Data schema
menuOrder: 1
---

## Use case

We want to create a cube for a dataset which uses the
[Entity-Attribute-Value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Entity–attribute–value_model)

> model (EAV), i.e., stores entities in a table that can be joined to another table with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
model (EAV). It stores entities in a table that can be joined to another table with
```

numerous attribute-value pairs. Each entity is not guaranteed to have the same set of

> accociated attributes, thus, making the entity-attribute-value relation a sparse

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
associated attributes, thus making the entity-attribute-value relation a sparse
```

> matrix. In the cube, we'd like every attribute to be modeled as a dimension.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
matrix. In the cube, we'd like every attribute to be modelled as a dimension.
```

## Data schema

Let's explore the `Users` cube that contains the entities:

```javascript
cube(`Users`, {
  sql: `SELECT * FROM public.users`,

  joins: {
    Orders: {
      relationship: 'hasMany',
      sql: `${Users}.id = ${Orders}.user_id`,
    }
  },
  
  dimensions: {
    name: {
      sql: `first_name || ' ' || last_name`,
      type: `string`
    }
  }
});
```

The `Users` cube is joined with the `Orders` cube to reflect that there might be many
orders associated with a single user. The orders remain in various statuses,
as reflected by the `status` dimension, and their creation dates are available via the
`createdAt` dimension:

```javascript
cube(`Orders`, {
  sql: `SELECT * FROM public.orders`,
  
  dimensions: {
    status: {
      sql: `status`,
      type: `string`
    },

    createdAt: {
      sql: `created_at`,
      type: `time`
    }
  }
});
```

Currently, the dataset contains orders in the following statuses:

> ```javascript

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```json
```

```javascript
cube(`UsersStatuses_Joins`, {
  sql: `
    SELECT
      users.first_name,
      users.last_name,
      MIN(cOrders.created_at) AS cCreatedAt,
      MIN(pOrders.created_at) AS pCreatedAt,
      MIN(sOrders.created_at) AS sCreatedAt
    FROM public.users AS users
    LEFT JOIN public.orders AS cOrders
      ON users.id = cOrders.user_id AND cOrders.status = 'completed'
    LEFT JOIN public.orders AS pOrders
      ON users.id = pOrders.user_id AND pOrders.status = 'processing'
    LEFT JOIN public.orders AS sOrders
      ON users.id = sOrders.user_id AND sOrders.status = 'shipped'
    GROUP BY 1, 2
  `,
  
  dimensions: {
    name: {
      sql: `first_name || ' ' || last_name`,
      type: `string`
    },

    completedCreatedAt: {
      sql: `cCreatedAt`,
      type: `time`,
    },

    processingCreatedAt: {
      sql: `pCreatedAt`,
      type: `time`,
    },

    shippedCreatedAt: {
      sql: `sCreatedAt`,
      type: `time`,
    }
  }
});
```

Querying the cube would yield data like this. As we can see, every user has attributes
that show the earliest creation date for their orders in all three statuses. However,

> some attrbutes don't have values (meaning that a user doesn't have orders in this status). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
some attributes don't have values (meaning that a user doesn't have orders in this status). 
```

> ```javascript

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```json
```

[
  {
    "UsersStatuses_Joins.name": "Ally Blanda",
    "UsersStatuses_Joins.completedCreatedAt": "2019-03-05T00:00:00.000",
    "UsersStatuses_Joins.processingCreatedAt": null,
    "UsersStatuses_Joins.shippedCreatedAt": "2019-04-06T00:00:00.000"
  },
  {
    "UsersStatuses_Joins.name": "Cayla Mayert",
    "UsersStatuses_Joins.completedCreatedAt": "2019-06-14T00:00:00.000",
    "UsersStatuses_Joins.processingCreatedAt": "2021-05-20T00:00:00.000",
    "UsersStatuses_Joins.shippedCreatedAt": null
  },
  {
    "UsersStatuses_Joins.name": "Concepcion Maggio",
    "UsersStatuses_Joins.completedCreatedAt": null,
    "UsersStatuses_Joins.processingCreatedAt": "2020-07-14T00:00:00.000",
    "UsersStatuses_Joins.shippedCreatedAt": "2019-07-19T00:00:00.000"
  }
]
```

The drawback is that when the set of statuses changes, we'll need to amend the cube definition in several places: update selected values and joins in SQL as well as update the dimensions. Let's see how to work around that.

### Static attributes, DRY version

We can embrace the

> [Don't repeat yourself](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself) principle

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[Don't Repeat Yourself](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself) principle
```

over statuses in relevant parts of the cube's code.

```javascript
const statuses = [
  'completed',
  'processing',
  'shipped'
];

const createValue = (status, index) =>
  `MIN(orders_${index}.created_at) AS createdAt_${index}`

const createJoin = (status, index) =>
  `LEFT JOIN public.orders AS orders_${index}
    ON users.id = orders_${index}.user_id
    AND orders_${index}.status = '${status}'`

const createDimension = (status, index) => ({
  [`${status}CreatedAt`]: {
    sql: (CUBE) => `createdAt_${index}`,
    type: `time`,
  }
})

cube(`UsersStatuses_DRY`, {
  sql: `
    SELECT
      users.first_name,
      users.last_name,
      ${statuses.map(createValue).join(',')}
    FROM public.users AS users
    ${statuses.map(createJoin).join('')}
    GROUP BY 1, 2
  `,
  
  dimensions: Object.assign(
    {
      name: {
        sql: `first_name || ' ' || last_name`,
        type: `string`
      }
    },
    statuses.reduce((all, status, index) => ({
      ...all,
      ...createDimension(status, index)
    }), {})
  )
});
```

The new `UsersStatuses_DRY` cube is functionally identical to the `UsersStatuses_Joins`

> cube above. So, querying this new cube would yield the same data. However, there's still

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
cube above. Querying this new cube would yield the same data. However, there's still
```

> a static list of statuses present in the cube's cube. Let's see how to work around that.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a static list of statuses present in the cube's source code. Let's work around that next.
```

### Dynamic attributes

We can eliminate the list of statuses from the cube's code by loading this list from an
external source. Let's assume that we've created an API service that fetches statuses,

> obviously, by running a Cube query. Here's the code from the `fetch.js` file that defines

Reviewer 4: I think this sentence would sound better without `, obviously,` as it's not necessary (or it may even sound a bit condescending to some).

the `fetchStatuses` function that would load the statuses from an API service. Let's keep

> this file outside the `schema` foilder:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this file outside the `schema` folder:
```

asyncModule(async () => {
  const statuses = await fetchStatuses();

  const createValue = (status, index) =>
    `MIN(orders_${index}.created_at) AS createdAt_${index}`

  const createJoin = (status, index) =>
    `LEFT JOIN public.orders AS orders_${index}
      ON users.id = orders_${index}.user_id
      AND orders_${index}.status = '${status}'`

  const createDimension = (status, index) => ({
    [`${status}CreatedAt`]: {
      sql: (CUBE) => `createdAt_${index}`,
      type: `time`,
    }
  })

  cube(`UsersStatuses_Dynamic`, {
    sql: `
      SELECT
        users.first_name,
        users.last_name,
        ${statuses.map(createValue).join(',')}
      FROM public.users AS users
      ${statuses.map(createJoin).join('')}
      GROUP BY 1, 2
    `,
    
    dimensions: Object.assign(
      {
        name: {
          sql: `first_name || ' ' || last_name`,
          type: `string`
        }
      },
      statuses.reduce((all, status, index) => ({
        ...all,
        ...createDimension(status, index)
      }), {})
    )
  });
});
```

Again, the new `UsersStatuses_Dynamic` cube is functionally identical to the previously

> created cubes. So, querying this new cube would yield the same data, too. The only drawback

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
created cubes. So, querying this new cube would yield the same data too. The only drawback
```
